First draft of Svinval (#668)
riscv/riscv-isa-manual: src/supervisor.tex

would invalidate.  However, unlike SFENCE.VMA, SINVAL.VMA instructions are only
ordered with respect to SFENCE.VMA, SFENCE.W.INVAL, and SFENCE.INVAL.IR
instructions, defined below.

\vspace{-0.2in}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{O@{}R@{}R@{}F@{}R@{}S}
\\
\instbitrange{31}{25} &
\instbitrange{24}{20} &
\instbitrange{19}{15} &
\instbitrange{14}{12} &
\instbitrange{11}{7} &
\instbitrange{6}{0} \\
\hline
\multicolumn{1}{|c|}{funct7} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs2} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs1} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{funct3} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rd} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{opcode} \\
\hline
7 & 5 & 5 & 3 & 5 & 7 \\
SFENCE.W.INVAL & 0 & 0 & PRIV & 0 & SYSTEM \\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}

\vspace{-0.2in}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{O@{}R@{}R@{}F@{}R@{}S}
\\
\instbitrange{31}{25} &
\instbitrange{24}{20} &
\instbitrange{19}{15} &
\instbitrange{14}{12} &
\instbitrange{11}{7} &
\instbitrange{6}{0} \\
\hline
\multicolumn{1}{|c|}{funct7} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs2} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs1} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{funct3} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rd} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{opcode} \\
\hline
7 & 5 & 5 & 3 & 5 & 7 \\
SFENCE.INVAL.IR & 1 & 0 & PRIV & 0 & SYSTEM \\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}

> The SFENCE.W.INVAL instruction guarantees that any previous stores already

Reviewer: Should "stores" here be "writes" for consistency?

visible to the current RISC-V hart are ordered before subsequent SINVAL.VMA
instructions issued by the same hart.  The SFENCE.INVAL.IR instruction
guarantees that any previous SINVAL.VMA instructions issued by the current hart

> are ordered before subsequent implicit references by that hart to the

Reviewer: Can the "implicit references" terms in the priv. spec be changed to "implicit accesses" for consistency with usage of the latter in the priv. and base specifications?

executing in S-mode or HS-mode will raise an illegal instruction exception, and
an attempt to execute SINVAL.VMA when {\tt hstatus}.VTVM=1 while executing in
VS-mode raises a virtual instruction exception.  Likewise, an attempt to
execute HINVAL.GVMA in HS-mode when {\tt mstatus}.TVM=1 raises an illegal
instruction exception.  An attempt to execute HINVAL.VVMA or HINVAL.GVMA when
V=1 raises a virtual instruction exception, and an attempt to execute any of
the above in U-mode or VU-mode raises an illegal instruction exception.

\begin{commentary}
  SFENCE.W.INVAL and SFENCE.INVAL.IR instructions do not need to be trapped when
  {\tt mstatus}.TVM=1 or when {\tt hstatus}.VTVM=1, as they only have ordering
  effects but no visible side effects.  Trapping of the SINVAL.VMA instruction
  is sufficient to enable emulation of the intended overall TLB maintenance
  functionality.
\end{commentary}

\begin{commentary}
  In typical usage, software will invalidate a range of virtual addresses in
  the address-translation caches by issuing an SFENCE.W.INVAL instruction,
  issuing a series of SINVAL.VMA, HINVAL.VVMA, or HINVAL.GVMA instructions to

>   the addresses (and optionally ASIDs) in question, and then issuing an

Reviewer: "and optionally ASIDs or VMIDs".

  SFENCE.INVAL.IR instruction.

  High-performance implementations will be able to pipeline the
  address-translation cache invalidation operations, and will defer any
  pipeline stalls or other memory ordering enforcement until an SFENCE.W.INVAL,

>   SFENCE.INVAL.IR, or SFENCE.VMA instruction is executed.

Reviewer: "or HFENCE.*VMA" to not raise questions about why it's left out.

ordered with respect to SFENCE.VMA, SFENCE.W.INVAL, and SFENCE.INVAL.IR
instructions, defined below.

\vspace{-0.2in}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{O@{}R@{}R@{}F@{}R@{}S}
\\
\instbitrange{31}{25} &
\instbitrange{24}{20} &
\instbitrange{19}{15} &
\instbitrange{14}{12} &
\instbitrange{11}{7} &
\instbitrange{6}{0} \\
\hline
\multicolumn{1}{|c|}{funct7} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs2} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs1} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{funct3} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rd} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{opcode} \\
\hline
7 & 5 & 5 & 3 & 5 & 7 \\
SFENCE.W.INVAL & 0 & 0 & PRIV & 0 & SYSTEM \\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}

\vspace{-0.2in}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{O@{}R@{}R@{}F@{}R@{}S}
\\
\instbitrange{31}{25} &
\instbitrange{24}{20} &
\instbitrange{19}{15} &
\instbitrange{14}{12} &
\instbitrange{11}{7} &
\instbitrange{6}{0} \\
\hline
\multicolumn{1}{|c|}{funct7} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs2} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rs1} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{funct3} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{rd} &
\multicolumn{1}{c|}{opcode} \\
\hline
7 & 5 & 5 & 3 & 5 & 7 \\
SFENCE.INVAL.IR & 0 & 0 & PRIV & 0 & SYSTEM \\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}

The SFENCE.W.INVAL instruction guarantees that any previous stores already

> visible to the curent RISC-V hart are ordered befure subsequent SINVAL.VMA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
visible to the current RISC-V hart are ordered before subsequent SINVAL.VMA
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

instructions issued by the same hart.  The SFENCE.INVAL.IR instruction
guarantees that any previous SINVAL.VMA instructions issued by the current hart
are ordered before subsequent implicit references by that hart to the
memory-management data structures.

When issued in order (but not necessarily consecutively) by a single hart, the
sequence SFENCE.W.INVAL, SINVAL.VMA, and SFENCE.INVAL.IR has the same effect as
a hypothetical SFENCE.VMA instruction in which:
\begin{itemize}
  \item the values of {\em rs1} and {\em rs2} for the SFENCE.VMA are the same
    as those used in the SINVAL.VMA,
  \item reads and writes prior to the SFENCE.W.INVAL are considered to be those
    prior to the SFENCE.VMA, and

>   \item reads and writes following to the SFENCE.INVAL.IR are considered to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  \item reads and writes following the SFENCE.INVAL.IR are considered to be
```
